feat: section on trends (#70)
lamalab-org/chembench-paper: src/tex/appendix.tex

Reviewer: add a sentence about preference training: 

Clearly, the post training (e.g. RLHF) we currently do does not equip models with "chemical taste" - but this would actually be interesting if we would like to couple models with GAs or stuff like that.

Reviewer: @AdrianM0 do you think that this might still be worth adding? I'm thinking about stuff like https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01711 being very interesting but not possible at the moment

\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection{Summary of trends and recommendations}

\oone model consistently leads across both \ChemBench corpus and \chembenchmini.  \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet, \GPTFourO, \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct form the next tier of strong performers. These models show robust performance across all skills and difficulty levels. 

> Larger models generally perform better (\LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneSeventyBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct). However, smaller but well-designed models can compete with larger models. For example, \GemmaTwoNineBIt has an overall accuracy of 0.47 on \ChemBench corpus, which is only 18\% less accurate than the larger \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Larger models generally perform better (\LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneSeventyBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct). However, some smaller models can compete with larger models. For example, \GemmaTwoNineBIt has an overall accuracy of 0.47 on the \ChemBench corpus, which is only 18\% less accurate than the largest model from the LLama-3.1 herd (\LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct).
```

Reviewer 2: I dont get this? Gemma is 9B Llama 3.1 model mentioned is 8B?

> One can observe a clear progression of performance across model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo). Newer versions consistently outperform their predecessors, indicating improvements in scientific understanding of these model families.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can observe a clear progression of performance across model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo) and newer versions typically outperform their predecessors on \chembench.
```

> Scores of knowledge-intensive are generally lower than those of Calculation and Reasoning. Reasoning tends to be the strongest skill among the three.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scores on knowledge-intensive tasks are typically lower than those on calculation and reasoning-intensive questions. Performance on reasoning-intensive questions in \chembench tends to be the highest.
```

> Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. 
```

perhaps link to this facebook paper that stuff is learned in pretraining

Reviewer: Perhaps says that just training on ChemRxiv or stuff like this will not help - link to the performance of PaperQA
And that much of the knowledge chemists care about is also very specific (e.g. about certain reactions or molecules for which chemists also go to specialized databases)

Reviewer: Perhaps say that finding out training tasks that instill a clearer molecular representation would be a way forward

> Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities. Larger models consistently perform better. However, there's evidence that well-trained smaller models can compete with larger models. 
> Performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions should be included in training or finetuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. 
However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions should be included in training or finetuning.
```

perhaps give concrete examples of questions that are still difficult (NMR, isomers, ion lottery) 

in the model scaling discussion, we can perhaps also emphasize that some of the tasks (isomers, point group) show very clear distinctions between models 
<img width="935" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-25 at 16 33 07" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4af21a1a-d074-4b11-81ca-7eec77a14ac8">

\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection{Summary of trends and recommendations}

> \oone model consistently leads across both \ChemBench corpus and \chembenchmini.  \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet, \GPTFourO, \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct form the next tier of strong performers. These models show robust performance across all skills and difficulty levels. 
> Larger models generally perform better (\LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneSeventyBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct). However smaller but well-designed models like can compete with larger models. For example \GemmaTwoNineBIt has an overall accuracy of 0.47 on \ChemBench corpus, which is only 18\% less accurate than the larger \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct model.
> Clear progression in model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo). Newer versions consistently outperform their predecessors indicating improvements in scientific understanding of these model families.
> Basic tasks are consistently solved across all models and even top model show a drop in performance on the advanced tasks except for \oone model.
> Scores of knowledge intensive are generally lower than both Calculation and Reasoning. Reasoning tends to be the strongest skill among three.
> 
> Based on these findings some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training. Possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts and or with chemistry knowledge base integration. 
> Models show strongest performance in reasoning tasks, this suggests current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities. Larger models consistently perform better, However, there's evidence that well trained smaller models can compete with larger models. 
> Performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, this suggests including more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions in training or finetuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\oone model consistently leads across both \ChemBench corpus and \chembenchmini.  \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet, \GPTFourO, \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct form the next tier of strong performers. These models show robust performance across all skills and difficulty levels. 

Larger models generally perform better (\LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneSeventyBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct). However, smaller but well-designed models can compete with larger models. For example, \GemmaTwoNineBIt has an overall accuracy of 0.47 on \ChemBench corpus, which is only 18\% less accurate than the larger \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct model.
One can observe a clear progression of performance across model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo). Newer versions consistently outperform their predecessors, indicating improvements in scientific understanding of these model families.
Scores of knowledge-intensive are generally lower than those of Calculation and Reasoning. Reasoning tends to be the strongest skill among the three.

Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. 
Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities. Larger models consistently perform better. However, there's evidence that well-trained smaller models can compete with larger models. 
Performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions should be included in training or finetuning.
```

> which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities.

or that our reasoning tasks are not very complex reasoning ;) 

> However, there's evidence that well-trained smaller models can compete with larger models.  

does this require a reference or do you mean Gemma?

Author: > or that our reasoning tasks are not very complex reasoning ;)

Mmm I agree. maybe we have a lot of simple reasoning tasks.  Should I change this to `which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities required for solving tasks similar to our corpus` ?
or we can even consider removing recommendations all together.

Author: > does this require a reference or do you mean Gemma?

yes I meant Gemma.

Author: yeah i think `However, there's evidence that well-trained smaller models can compete with larger models.` is confusing maybe  I can rewrite this to maybe `Gemma and Phi demonstrates the potential for smaller models offering a compelling trade-off between performance and resource requirements.`

> \clearpage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection{Summary of trends and recommendations}

\oone consistently leads across both \ChemBench corpus and \chembenchmini.  \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet, \GPTFourO, \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct form the next tier of strong performers. These models show robust performance across all skills and difficulty levels. 

> Larger models generally perform better (\LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneSeventyBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct). However, smaller but well-designed models can compete with larger models. For example, \GemmaTwoNineBIt has an overall accuracy of 0.48 on \ChemBench corpus, which is only 10\% less accurate than the much larger \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct model.

Reviewer: you might call it overkill, but it might be nice to make these number a `\variable` to automatically update if we change the corpus

Reviewer 2: this is done now, can you have a look?

Reviewer 2: there is also a conflict oops

> One can observe a clear progression of performance across model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo or \GPTFourO > \GPTFour > \GPTThreeFiveTurboZeroT). Newer versions consistently outperform their predecessors, indicating improvements in scientific understanding of these model families.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can observe a clear progression of performance across model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo or \GPTFourO > \GPTFour > \GPTThreeFiveTurboZeroT). Newer versions consistently outperform their predecessors.
```

not sure if we can generalize to scientific understanding. perhaps chemical understanding

Scores on knowledge-intensive tasks are typically lower than those on calculation and reasoning-intensive questions. Performance on reasoning-intensive questions in \chembench tends to be the highest.

> Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. However, this type of knowledge should be integrated with sound machine learning approaches. For example, \GalacticaOneTwentyB showed the lowest perforamnce in our study, even though it was specifically trained on scientific text. This suggests that the knowledge embedded in papers and textbooks has not been fully leveraged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. However, this type of knowledge should be integrated with sound machine-learning approaches. For example, \GalacticaOneTwentyB showed the lowest performance in our study, even though it was specifically trained on scientific text. This suggests that the knowledge embedded in papers and textbooks has not been fully leveraged.
```

this sounds very bashing on Galactica - I wonder if arguing that even retrieval from literature (=PaperQA) might not be even more effective. We can also link to the concrete fact that we would probably like to have specific tasks that try ot make the model understand the 3D structure of compounds

> Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions should be included in training or finetuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions should be included in training or finetuning.
```

perhaps we can make this more effective by specifying an advanced chemistry problem (the ion lottery might be a naiive one)

> Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions should be included in training or finetuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions (e.g., solving analytical chemistry problems) should be included in training or finetuning.
```

\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection{Summary of trends and recommendations}

\oone consistently leads across both \ChemBench corpus and \chembenchmini.  \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet, \GPTFourO, \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct form the next tier of strong performers. These models show robust performance across all skills and difficulty levels. 

> Larger models generally perform better (\LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneSeventyBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct). However, smaller but well-designed models can compete with larger models. For example, \GemmaTwoNineBIt has an overall accuracy of \variable{output/trends_section_variables/gemma_9B.txt} on \ChemBench corpus, which is only \variable{output/trends_section_variables/diff_between_llama_405B_and_gemma_9B.txt}\% less accurate than the much larger \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Larger models generally perform better (\LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneSeventyBInstruct > \LlamaThreeOneEightBInstruct). However, smaller but well-designed models can compete with larger models. For example, \GemmaTwoNineBIt has an overall accuracy of \variable{output/trends_section_variables/gemma_9B.txt} on the \ChemBench corpus, which is only \variable{output/trends_section_variables/diff_between_llama_405B_and_gemma_9B.txt}\% less accurate than the much larger \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct model.
```

One can observe a clear progression of performance across model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo or \GPTFourO > \GPTFour > \GPTThreeFiveTurboZeroT). Newer versions consistently outperform their predecessors.
Scores on knowledge-intensive tasks are typically lower than those on calculation and reasoning-intensive questions. Performance on reasoning-intensive questions in \chembench tends to be the highest.

> Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. However, this type of knowledge should be integrated with sound machine-learning approaches. For example, even \PaperQATwo could not outperform the \gls{llm} it is using for directing the tools, even though the agent has access to literature evidence. This suggests we might need an overhaul of how we approach agent building, and how we train models for science applications, since clearly the valuable information stored in textbooks and papers, that can be used to answer questions is not fully leveraged by any of the state-of-the-art models and systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. However, innovation is also needed to incorporate this information into the systems. For example, even \PaperQATwo could not outperform the \gls{llm} it is using for directing the tools, even though the agent has access to literature evidence.
This suggests we might need to not only focus on building chemistry-specific retrieval datasets since current systems fail to retrieve the relevant systems and should be coupled with more domain-specific databases. However, the observation that our ReAct agents were too fragile to answer questions for which they had custom-made tools available correctly suggests that we also must invest in building more robust agent frameworks. 
```

Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions (e.g., solving analytical chemistry problems) should be included in training or finetuning.

> The post training (e.g. RLHF) we currently do does not equip models with human-like "chemical taste". This however can be of interest in future discovery research (e.g., discovery via constrained decoding or genetic algorithms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The post-training (e.g., \gls{rlhf}) we currently do does not equip models with human-like \enquote{chemical taste.} This, however, will be essential for future discovery research (e.g., in combination with genetic algorithms).
```

\end{figure}

\clearpage
\subsection{Summary of trends and recommendations}

> \oone consistently leads across both \ChemBench corpus and \chembenchmini.  \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet, \GPTFourO, \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct form the next tier of strong performers. These models show robust performance across all skills and difficulty levels. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\oone consistently leads across both the \ChemBench corpus and \chembenchmini.  \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet, \GPTFourO, \LlamaThreeOneFourZeroFiveBInstruct form the next tier of strong performers. These models show robust performance across all skills and difficulty levels. 
```

One can observe a clear progression of performance across model families (e.g., \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet >  \ClaudeThree > \ClaudeTwo or \GPTFourO > \GPTFour > \GPTThreeFiveTurboZeroT). Newer versions consistently outperform their predecessors.
Scores on knowledge-intensive tasks are typically lower than those on calculation and reasoning-intensive questions. 

Based on these findings, some scope for improving these models could be to focus on enhancing knowledge-based training, possibly through improved pre-training on chemistry-specific texts or with chemistry knowledge-base integration. However, innovation is also needed to incorporate this information into the systems. For example, even \PaperQATwo could not outperform the \gls{llm} it is using for directing the tools, even though the agent has access to literature evidence.

> This suggests we might need to not only focus on building chemistry-specific retrieval datasets since current systems fail to retrieve the relevant systems and should be coupled with more domain-specific databases. However, the observation that our ReAct agents were too fragile to answer questions for which they had custom-made tools available correctly suggests that we also must invest in building more robust agent frameworks (see \Cref{sec:react-environment} for further discussion about the ReAct environment). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This suggests we might need to not only focus on building chemistry-specific retrieval datasets since current systems fail to retrieve the relevant papers and should be coupled with more domain-specific databases. However, the observation that our ReAct agents were too fragile to answer questions for which they had custom-made tools available correctly suggests that we also must invest in building more robust agent frameworks (see \Cref{sec:react-environment} for further discussion about the ReAct environment). 
```

Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions (e.g., solving analytical chemistry problems) should be included in training or finetuning.

> The post-training (e.g., \gls{rlhf}) we currently do does not equip models with human-like \enquote{chemical taste.} This, however, will be essential for future discovery research (e.g., in combination with genetic algorithms).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The post-training (e.g., \gls{rlhf}) we currently do does not equip models with human-like \enquote{chemical taste.} This, however, will be essential for future discovery research (e.g., in combination with genetic algorithms).

As commented above, \PaperQATwo was outperformed by the \gls{llm} powering it. Similarly, \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet only slightly improved the results when equipped with some specific tools, while \GPTFourO performance decreased in this same tool environment. Therefore, a robust chemical agent environment optimized to solve general chemical problems, instead of focusing on bibliographic search or lab work, can be useful in the future.
```

> Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions (e.g., solving analytical chemistry problems) should be included in training or finetuning.
> 
> The post-training (e.g., \gls{rlhf}) we currently do does not equip models with human-like \enquote{chemical taste.} This, however, will be essential for future discovery research (e.g., in combination with genetic algorithms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions (e.g., solving analytical chemistry problems) should be included in training or finetuning.

The post-training (e.g., \gls{rlhf}) of the current models does not equip them with human-like \enquote{chemical taste.} This, however, will be essential for future discovery research (e.g., in combination with genetic algorithms).
```

This suggests we might need to not only focus on building chemistry-specific retrieval datasets since current systems fail to retrieve the relevant systems and should be coupled with more domain-specific databases. However, the observation that our ReAct agents were too fragile to answer questions for which they had custom-made tools available correctly suggests that we also must invest in building more robust agent frameworks. 

Models show the strongest performance in reasoning tasks on the \chembench corpus, which suggests that current training approaches are good at developing logical/reasoning capabilities for basic problem-solving of university-level exams. However, performance drops significantly for advanced tasks, suggesting that more advanced chemistry problems with complex, multi-step solutions (e.g., solving analytical chemistry problems) should be included in training or finetuning.

The post-training (e.g., \gls{rlhf}) we currently do does not equip models with human-like \enquote{chemical taste.} This, however, will be essential for future discovery research (e.g., in combination with genetic algorithms).

> As commented above, \PaperQATwo was outperformed by the \gls{llm} powering it. Similarly, \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet only slightly improved the results when equipped with some specific tools, while \GPTFourO performance decreased in this same tool environment (see \Cref{sec:react-environment} for further discussion about the ReAct environment). Therefore, a robust chemical agent environment optimized to solve general chemical problems, instead of focusing on bibliographic search or lab work, can be useful in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As commented above, \PaperQATwo was outperformed by the \gls{llm} powering it. Similarly, \ClaudeThreeFiveSonnet only slightly improved the results when equipped with some specific tools, while \GPTFourO performance decreased in this same tool environment (see \Cref{sec:react-environment} for further discussion about the ReAct environment). Therefore, a robust chemical agent framework optimized to solve general chemical problems instead of focusing on bibliographic search or lab work can be useful in the future.
```

in agent world being like to use language from reinforcement learning. In there, an environment is the environment in which the agent operates (e.g. the stuff it can interact with) - which is different from the framework driving the agent. 

in general - is this section not a bit redundant with the one above where you discuss agents? Perhaps it makes sense to put the two paragraphs together?

Reviewer 2: @MrtinoRG added this bit, so if it appears somewhere else it can ne dropped?

Reviewer 3: Now should be solved, I just removed the paragraph and added the reference to the appendix above
